Local-build-instructions (#2922)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/community-handbook/local-build.md

(ch-local-build)=
# How to build Jupyter Book locally

## But why build locally?
It's always handy to be able to preview any changes you have been working on as you go - you can be confident that changes you have made are accurate and as intended. 

> A nice way to do this is to use the underlying Jupyter Book tool to build the book locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A nice way to do this is to use the underlying [Jupyter Book](https://jupyterbook.org/en/stable/intro.html tool to build the book locally.
```

This is useful because it allows you to preview any changes you have made on your local machine *before* you push your changes to a remote branch. 
You can then decide if you are happy with the result and push your changes to the remote branch thus helping to keep Pull Request conversations and commit histories a bit cleaner.

## Step-by-step guide

> 1. Install miniconda https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html#regular-installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install miniconda by following the instructions for your Operating System (Windows, MacOS, Linux) at this link: https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html#regular-installation
```

> 2. Run `conda init` in your terminal. You should see `(base)` in your prompt indicating that conda was successfully installed and you are now in it's base environment.

Reviewer: We maybe want to be explicit about "open your terminal app and run the `conda init` command"

Reviewer 2: Yes, i agree with this.
And to add to it,  my cmd did not recognize the `conda init` , i had to use the Anaconda prompt(miniconda) terminal  to run it.

Reviewer: Anaconda and miniconda are different installations. Are you sure you installed miniconda, as per the instructions? Did your machine already have anaconda installed before you started?

Reviewer 2: Yes, i followed the instruction for installation https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html#regular-installation, I selected for windows.
No i never had the Anaconda on my machine.

Reviewer: Huh, ok. This is probably a "things are different on Windows" scenario, so we should have a nested bullet point here saying "on windows, do this instead"

Author: Hi both - hopefully I've addressed the comments in this conversation in commit c3c7dda3d70655f20d8429d736b9cc7fa112f120 . Namely adding more narrative and the point about needing Anaconda prompt on Windows

Reviewer: Are you sure you pushed the narrative changes? I'm examining commit [`c3c7dda` (#2922)](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/pull/2922/commits/c3c7dda3d70655f20d8429d736b9cc7fa112f120) but it looks pretty similar to me? I'm imagining that we get rid of the bullet points under "Why did we recommend using (mini)conda?"

Author: ah I was looking at the wrong section - I added some very light touch edits on the build instructions in c3c7dda. Ok no problem I'll have a crack at the miniconda section.

Author: 2ca45fa43a1a2a2597b8387e641b2f6ab573334a is hopefully more what you had in mind, and the title is now in line with the toc

3. Create a new environment and install a modern version of python into it
   ```
   conda create --name the-turing-way python=3.10
   ```
4. Activate the environment with `conda activate the-turing-way`. Any commands we run with Python or pip from now on will use the versions of Python and pip installed into _this_ conda env, not any others.

> 5. Clone the repo: `git clone https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Clone the repository from GitHub to your machine using the command `git clone https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way`
```

> 6. Change into the repo: `cd the-turing-way`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Change into the repository folder using the command `cd the-turing-way`
```

Author: I think we both had in mind `cd` <> Change Directory, but we could include both i.e. `"Navigate to the cloned repo with the 'Change Directory' command ......`

Author: I've edited @sgibson91  suggested change - hopefully this co-commit is more informative now @aleesteele ?

7. Change into the correct folder `cd book/website`

> 8. Install the dependencies _into your conda environment_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Install the dependencies _into your conda environment_.
   Since we already activated the environment, we are automatically using the environment's version of pip and installing the packages into the correct location.
```

   ```
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
9. And now build the book:
   ```
   jupyter-book build .
   ```
10. The output of the build process will provide output such as below that demonstrate how you can view the book locally:
    ```
    ===============================================================================

    Finished generating HTML for book.
    Your book's HTML pages are here:
        _build/html/
    You can look at your book by opening this file in a browser:
        _build/html/index.html
    Or paste this line directly into your browser bar:
        file:///Users/sgibson/source/github/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/book/website/_build/html/index.html

    ===============================================================================
    ```
    
### Build the book while working on a Pull Request

> If you would like to preview a version of the book from a certain branch (perhaps to render the book while working on a PR) then simply switch to the required branch and rebuild the book as in step 10:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you would like to preview a version of the book from a certain branch (perhaps to render the book while working on a PR) then simply switch to the required branch and rebuild the book as in step 9:
```
From the wording, i think this is referring to step 9 not step 10.

   ```
   git checkout mybranch
   jupyter-book build .
   ```
Follow the link as before and you will see changes specific to that branch rendered.

> ## Why did we recommend using miniconda?

Reviewer: I think this section might read better if it was written up as a narrative instead of bullet points?

> ## Why did we recommend using miniconda?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why did we recommend using (mini)conda?
```

Just to indicate that the package manager we are using is conda, and the distribution of conda we are using is miniconda.

- Running the `juypter-book` command to build the Turing Way book relies on having a python installation on your machine. As with any other programming language such as R or Julia, any given python installation might look different from another due to the packages or libraries that come with the installation. 
- In particular, some packages depend on the presence of specific versions of other packages to function, and so to ensure your local build works smoothly you will want to minimize as much mismatched dependencies as possible.
- But this can be difficult! Even with an organized, concerted effort, package management for programming languages naturally throws up dependency issues. Python packages, for reasons not discussed here, tend to suffer from dependency issues a bit more than other languages (note that all languages do!) and one guaranteed way to come across such an issue by trying to maintain all of your python projects using just one, large set of packages, each at a specific version. You simply cant cater to the needs of all package dependencies this way. https://xkcd.com/1987/   
![](https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/python_environment.png)

> - Anaconda is package manager that can install Python, R and Julia distributions. *Miniconda* is just a smaller package manager that by default installs a smaller set of packages which means in terms of dependencies there are less things to go wrong.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
i will suggest adding the links to the Anaconda and miniconda documentation or site.

> - Anaconda is package manager that can install Python, R and Julia distributions. *Miniconda* is just a smaller package manager that by default installs a smaller set of packages which means in terms of dependencies there are less things to go wrong.

Reviewer: @sandygudie see my suggestion here for context around my comment "Anaconda and miniconda are different installations"

> - The most relevant feature for us here is *virtual environments*. Both anaconda and miniconda can easily create language agnostic virtual environments where each contains their own separate set of packages that don't interfere with each other. In fact it is best practice to create a virtual environment for each project you work on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The most relevant feature for us here is *virtual environments*. conda can easily create language agnostic virtual environments where each contains their own separate set of packages that don't interfere with each other. In fact it is best practice to create a virtual environment for each project you work on.
```

> - We *could* just use python's built in virtualenv tool to do this, but it doesn't extend into a multi-language env like anaconda and miniconda offer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We *could* just use python's built in virtualenv tool to do this, but it doesn't extend into a multi-language env like conda offers.
```

- By creating a separate environment on your local machine just for The Turing Way, this is a great way to minimize those dependency issues. 

> - Anaconda and miniconda also have community run channels that dedicate their time to providing you with a certain pool of packages that may be relevant to a specific project, for example the [Bioconda channel](https://github.com/bioconda/bioconda-recipes) that contains packages relevant for bioinformatics projects, and packages not necessarily found on the default channel. Other popular channels are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- conda also has community run channels that dedicate their time to providing you with a certain pool of packages that may be relevant to a specific project, for example the [Bioconda channel](https://github.com/bioconda/bioconda-recipes) that contains packages relevant for bioinformatics projects, and packages not necessarily found on the default channel. Other popular channels are:
```

(ch-local-build)=

> # How to build Jupyter Book locally

Reviewer: This title doesn't match the entry in the TOC. Should it?

Author: yes it should - amended in 2ca45fa43a1a2a2597b8387e641b2f6ab573334a

5. Clone The Turing Way repository from GitHub to your machine using the command `git clone https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way`
6. Change into the repo: `cd the-turing-way`
7. Then change into the sub-directory the website is built from using `cd book/website`
8. The Turing Way Book is built using multiple python libraries. We can install these dependencies _into your conda environment_ using the following command
   ```
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
   where the `requirements.txt` file contains a list of python libraries
9. And now build the book:
   ```
   jupyter-book build .
   ```
10. The output of the build process will provide output such as below that demonstrate how you can view the book locally:
    ```
    ===============================================================================

    Finished generating HTML for book.
    Your book's HTML pages are here:
        _build/html/
    You can look at your book by opening this file in a browser:
        _build/html/index.html
    Or paste this line directly into your browser bar:

>         file:///Users/sgibson/source/github/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/book/website/_build/html/index.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        file:///[...]/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/book/website/_build/html/index.html
```

No reason to have my local filepath in the book :)

    ```
    
### Build the book while working on a Pull Request
If you would like to preview a version of the book from a certain branch (perhaps to render the book while working on a PR) then simply switch to the required branch and rebuild the book as in step 9:
   ```
   git checkout mybranch
   jupyter-book build .
   ```
Follow the link as before and you will see changes specific to that branch rendered.

## Why did we recommend using (mini)conda?
In the step-by-step guide above, we made use of the `jupyter-book` command to build the Turing Way book. For this command to work as intended you will need a python installation on your machine. 
As with any other programming language such as R or Julia, any given python installation might look different from another due to the different packages or libraries that come with the installation.
Over time you will likely install even more packages, or update packages to newer versions. Some packages also depend on the presence of specific versions of other packages to function, and so to ensure your local build works smoothly you will want to minimize as much mismatched dependencies as possible.

> But this can be difficult! Even with an organized, concerted effort, package management for programming languages naturally throws up dependency issues. Python packages, for reasons not discussed here, tend to suffer from dependency issues a bit more than other languages (note that all languages do!) and one guaranteed way to come across such an issue by trying to maintain all of your python projects using just one, large set of packages, each at a specific version. You simply cant cater to the needs of all package dependencies this way. https://xkcd.com/1987/   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But this can be difficult! Even with an organized, concerted effort, package management for programming languages naturally throws up dependency issues. Python packages, for reasons not discussed here, tend to suffer from dependency issues a bit more than other languages (note that all languages do!) and one guaranteed way to come across such an issue by trying to maintain all of your python projects using just one, large set of packages, each at a specific version. You simply can't cater to the needs of all package dependencies this way. https://xkcd.com/1987/   
```

missing apostrophe
